README.md, before:

[![License: GPL v3](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-GPL%20v3-yellow.svg)](http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0)
[![DOI](https://zenodo.org/badge/369252917.svg)](https://zenodo.org/badge/latestdoi/369252917)
[![arXiv](http://img.shields.io/badge/arXiv-2104.03306-orange.svg?style=flat)](https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.03306)



# genulens
`genulens`, which stands for "generate microlensing", is a tool to simulate microlensing events using Monte Carlo simulation of the Galactic model developed by [Koshimoto, Baba & Bennett (2021), arXiv:2104.03306](https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.03306).  
The code itself has been published as [Koshimoto & Ranc (2021), Zenodo.4784948](http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4784948).   
Please cite the papers if you find this code useful in your research. 

The copyright of an included supplementary code, "option.cpp", belongs to Ian A. Bond and Takahiro Sumi.

## Before installation
Please ensure that GSL (GNU Scientific Library) is installed in your environment.  
If you do not have GSL, please download it from the link provided on the [GSL page](https://www.gnu.org/software/gsl/), and install it following README or INSTALL in the downloaded directory.

You can check where you have GSL by  
```
gsl-config --libs
```
If the command gsl-config does not work in the terminal, it probably means that the GSL lib is not installed, or unknown to the OS.


## Installation
If you have `git`, you can download the package by 
``` 
git clone https://github.com/nkoshimoto/genulens.git
```
This is recommended because that way you can track any future updates with `git`.

If you do not have `git`, you can simply download the package by clicking the green button "Code" on the upper right in [the repository page](https://github.com/nkoshimoto/genulens), selecting "Download ZIP", and then unzipping it.

In the downloaded directory (genulens), move into another genulens directory  
``` 
cd genulens  
```
There is Makefile in the directory, and you need a C++ compiler to `make`.  
The default compiler is `clang++`, which is available in macOS.  
Please replace the first uncommented line in Makefile with `g++` or any other C++ compiler if you prefer.  
If you are not sure if you have `clang++` or `g++`, you can check it by  
```
which clang++ (or g++)
```
If your terminal returns a full path for it, then you have the compiler.

You might also need to change the paths for GSL specified in Makefile.  
There are two lines to specify paths for GSL in the file;  
> INCLUDE = -I/opt/local/include  
> LINK = -L/opt/local/lib  

Please replace the path in INCLUDE with the path returned by  
```
gsl-config --cflags
```
and replace the path in LINK with the path returned by  
```
gsl-config --libs
```

   

After making sure that you specify your C++ compiler and the paths for GSL in Makefile, you can compile the program by  
```
make
```

If  
```
./genulens  
```
returns output lines that starts from   
> \#   Output of "./genulens "  

and ends with  
> \# Nlike/N= 100000 / 100000      wtlike/wtlike\_tE= 112366 / 112366 = 1.000000   

you are ready to use `genulens`. Note that the exact numbers of the end line might depend on your environment because the calculation uses random numbers.  
Please make sure that the input\_files/ directory is in the same directory as where you run `genulens`.


## Usage
See [Usage.pdf](https://github.com/nkoshimoto/genulens/blob/main/Usage.pdf).  
This document is still incomplete and will be revised in the future.


## Major updates
### v1.1
On June 3 2021, we released version 1.1 using a random number generator from GSL (GNU Scientific Library).  
This is because we realized that the random number generator from the C++ standard library, which was used in v1.0, does not have very good randomness.  
The statistics (the median, 1 sigma, 2 sigma values) were probably OK, but the distributions were jagged compared to the GSL one with a same number of simulation.  
Note that this version requires that you have GSL in your environment.  
 
### v1.0
First release on May 24 2021.

Commit message:

note on a star simulator added

README.md, after:

[![License: GPL v3](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-GPL%20v3-yellow.svg)](http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0)
[![DOI](https://zenodo.org/badge/369252917.svg)](https://zenodo.org/badge/latestdoi/369252917)
[![arXiv](http://img.shields.io/badge/arXiv-2104.03306-orange.svg?style=flat)](https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.03306)



# genulens
`genulens`, which stands for "generate microlensing", is a tool to simulate microlensing events using Monte Carlo simulation of the Galactic model developed by [Koshimoto, Baba & Bennett (2021), arXiv:2104.03306](https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.03306).  
The code itself has been published as [Koshimoto & Ranc (2021), Zenodo.4784948](http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4784948).   
Please cite the papers if you find this code useful in your research. 

The copyright of an included supplementary code, "option.cpp", belongs to Ian A. Bond and Takahiro Sumi.

## For star simulation
A version to simulate stars rather than microlensing events is currently under development, and will be issued shortly.

## Before installation
Please ensure that GSL (GNU Scientific Library) is installed in your environment.  
If you do not have GSL, please download it from the link provided on the [GSL page](https://www.gnu.org/software/gsl/), and install it following README or INSTALL in the downloaded directory.

You can check where you have GSL by  
```
gsl-config --libs
```
If the command gsl-config does not work in the terminal, it probably means that the GSL lib is not installed, or unknown to the OS.


## Installation
If you have `git`, you can download the package by 
``` 
git clone https://github.com/nkoshimoto/genulens.git
```
This is recommended because that way you can track any future updates with `git`.

If you do not have `git`, you can simply download the package by clicking the green button "Code" on the upper right in [the repository page](https://github.com/nkoshimoto/genulens), selecting "Download ZIP", and then unzipping it.

In the downloaded directory (genulens), move into another genulens directory  
``` 
cd genulens  
```
There is Makefile in the directory, and you need a C++ compiler to `make`.  
The default compiler is `clang++`, which is available in macOS.  
Please replace the first uncommented line in Makefile with `g++` or any other C++ compiler if you prefer.  
If you are not sure if you have `clang++` or `g++`, you can check it by  
```
which clang++ (or g++)
```
If your terminal returns a full path for it, then you have the compiler.

You might also need to change the paths for GSL specified in Makefile.  
There are two lines to specify paths for GSL in the file;  
> INCLUDE = -I/opt/local/include  
> LINK = -L/opt/local/lib  

Please replace the path in INCLUDE with the path returned by  
```
gsl-config --cflags
```
and replace the path in LINK with the path returned by  
```
gsl-config --libs
```

   

After making sure that you specify your C++ compiler and the paths for GSL in Makefile, you can compile the program by  
```
make
```

If  
```
./genulens  
```
returns output lines that starts from   
> \#   Output of "./genulens "  

and ends with  
> \# Nlike/N= 100000 / 100000      wtlike/wtlike\_tE= 112366 / 112366 = 1.000000   

you are ready to use `genulens`. Note that the exact numbers of the end line might depend on your environment because the calculation uses random numbers.  
Please make sure that the input\_files/ directory is in the same directory as where you run `genulens`.


## Usage
See [Usage.pdf](https://github.com/nkoshimoto/genulens/blob/main/Usage.pdf).  
This document is still incomplete and will be revised in the future.


## Major updates
### v1.1
On June 3 2021, we released version 1.1 using a random number generator from GSL (GNU Scientific Library).  
This is because we realized that the random number generator from the C++ standard library, which was used in v1.0, does not have very good randomness.  
The statistics (the median, 1 sigma, 2 sigma values) were probably OK, but the distributions were jagged compared to the GSL one with a same number of simulation.  
Note that this version requires that you have GSL in your environment.  
 
### v1.0
First release on May 24 2021.
